You are responsible for moving all of the books.
Could you tell me when you will be starting to move?
Not only moving the books, but rather the collections which are going to move, whatever the place where they are.
It's not a question of moving.
the printed and audiovisual materials.
Could you give us an idea of the numbers, how many volumes you will be moving?
About ten millions of volumes for the books and one million of documents for the audiovisual materials.
And how long do you think that will take to
It is organized in two different phases.
One started in February, is going to finish at the end of this month, for the collections which were outside of Paris.
And the second phase, second part, will last nine months as a
maximum and we don't know exactly when it's going to start because in this case the date of opening is important for the for the moving if we open in June the moving will start at this time
if we open in... We were just doing some mathematics.
If you're going to move nine million books in nine months, that's a million books a month, approximately?
No, it's not that.
It's ten million of books, volumes, in totality, and we already have done a part of the... Yes.
And as I told you, the books are moving in two different parts.
One, the first part, it is for the collections which were housed outside of Paris, because we had already an annex in Versailles and in Sablé, too.
in a small town located at 200 kilometers from Paris.
So it means that we have moved 60 kilometers and we will have to move more than 100 kilometers.
And, you know, two different places, two different collections.
and all of them are ten millions of volumes.
Are you moving them according to where they're going to be shelved?
Like, are you starting in the upper floors first and coming down?
Is that how you're doing it?
Yes.
It is not the order.
We choose to move them in relation where their future location and in relation with their
the way they are provided to the readers.
I mean, if they are frequently provided to the readers, they will move around the opening.
If they are not... What you say raises an interesting point.
You're choosing to put books that are in greatest demand by readers closer to the reading area.
Yes, but not book by book.
You know, the books here are organized in different, we call it in French, series.
Like, you know, we have a letter for, for instance, we have a letter
the letter G, which means general history, and so all books about general history are called G something, G1, G2, G2000, G3000.
Does that go along with the encyclopedic?
No, it's alphabetical order for division of knowledge, which
has been chosen in the seventeenth century.
It is proper to our library.
It's what we call classification.
You know, it's a classification for the Bibliotheque Nationale.
Because a number of your colleagues yesterday were telling us about the philosophy that you have, the encyclopedic intent of what you're creating, I guess, is an encyclopedic library?
This is the word that we found, we saw used many times yesterday.
Yes.
But I found that doesn't apply in terms of the classification.
You're talking about the shelving, actually, not the collecting aspect.
Yes, it's about, it is encyclopedic, but our encyclopedic collection has been organized in different subjects.
And this choice of subjects has been done in the 17th century.
So I mean, for instance, religion and philosophy and art have a great part in the organization.
But what we call problems of society, you know, they don't have any room in this classification, you know, because
We have books, but we don't have the good letter for that, because it's alphabetical order, A, B, C, D, E, it's for religion.
F is for law, G for general history, J for antique history, H for history of church, L for history of France,
K for history of Italy, L for history of France, M for history of northern countries, N for England, O for America, Spain and Oceania, and R for philosophy, S for natural sciences, T for medicine, U for
arts and mathematics, and X for grammar, Y for literature, and Z for all the subjects you don't have.
So you're keeping the same classification?
No.
We are going to move this collection with
this organization.
With the new organization.
Towards the new library.
And we maintain the classification.
But we decided to divide the different collections.
In the new building.
Yes.
For instance, the religion is going to go in the department of philosophy, history, social sciences.
History is going
Religion, you said, I'm sorry?
Yes.
Religion, OK.
And we don't divide the collections by book, but subject collection by subject collection.
I see.
I understand.
And now we have stopped this classification.
And in the new library,
have started a new classification.
Are you going to be on a card catalogue, or is it going to be online?
Online.
So no card catalogues?
No.
No, not at all.
The card catalogue, will you keep that?
Yes, we keep it.
Do you keep it up to date to it?
We keep it for the parts we have in both.
possibilities online and cards.
But if now we are not cataloging— We are not?
That was my next question.
So you're not adding any new items to it?
No.
So you're maintaining—so what's the cutoff point?
How—where does the catalog—the card catalog cut off?
What year?
1988.
And everything after that is totally online?
Yeah.
I see.
Are you happy?
Are you excited about the new building?
Just not excited with things that is normal evolution.
No problem.
Not a problem, but it is the same thing as
What we do now, we are calling.
We are phoning.
We use the phone.
Before, our parents and grandparents used to write.
We don't write more.
And so, as librarians, we use online catalogs.
That's all.
It's just progress, is what you're saying.
Yes.
How about in terms of, I guess my question was more pointed on the organization of the new library.
Are you happy with the way that the books are going to be?
I mean, would you rather have had them maybe perhaps a lot closer together and organized?
Do you think the towers are going to work out all right?
I don't think anything about that, because, you know,
this project was decided in 1988, or me, I decided not to complain about that.
It represents for us progress, because we have
space for collections, comfort for readers, and money for acquisitions.
And so, what do you want?
More?
Yes.
In French, I could say I have none in a .
Excuse me?
Complain.
Lady, when are you moving up to Tobias?
The collections, or me?
You, you?
I have already moved, because I have two offices.
You have two offices.
Yes.
I have one.
I went this morning in Tolbiac, and this afternoon here.
I see.
Thank you.
Thank you, by the way, for seeing us here.
Do you have a policy on ... I know that you're the legal deposit for everything published in France, but
Do you have a policy on what we call the last book policy, which we see in England, for instance?
Do deaccession things, I guess is what I'm asking, do deaccession books, books that aren't in demand?
You were talking earlier about putting books probably higher in the towers that people very rarely ask to see.
two parts, so the local deposit for all books published in France, that's an important part of the collections.
We must store these collections and keep it for future generations.
And secondly, we acquire a lot of
books in major subjects, and we have now a policy about free access collections and what we call stacks collections, so we have two collections.
And this free access collection is divided in two parts, one for what we call au jardin and another for pre-jardin.
one for upper level or lower level or one for general public and one for researchers and so the part reserved to the stacks is less important than it was here in the Bibliothèque Nationale because we did not have at this time free access and we used to say that it's
A third for free access upper level, a third for free access researchers, and a third for stacks.
I see.
And we acquire in all the subjects, and it's an important change because the old national library used to acquire only
in humanities, I mean social sciences, and history, and literature, and classic languages.
And now we open our collections to sciences and law, economics, and we buy in all those
I guess maybe I didn't make it clear.
Are there occasions where you'll have a book that's number one, what we call a brittle book, a book that's not in the best of condition, and also if that book is not being used, if scholars haven't asked for it in 20 years, is it possible, number one, that you might decide to deaccession, get rid of that book,
Or, number two, make a digital copy of it, and for the sake of conserving space, consider that digital copy satisfactory and get rid of the physical copy.
Is that something that you might consider doing, or is that not... It's a French book.
We'll try to keep it, even if it is in a bad state.
And we'll try to keep it, but we are going
if it's the case, to microfilm it or to microfish.
And so we'll keep both the original and the original.
So you will keep the original?
Yes.
And it is, for instance, different with the New York Public Library because the New York Public is
I know they don't keep the collections that are going to my crossing.
Because actually they're a private library.
People don't realize that it's not a public library.
But what we think, for French collections, it's normal to do that.
It's not quite normal to do it for foreign collections, because we have not the same mission about that.
But you know, French people
are, we say in French, conservateurs, and so they like to keep the things, you know, they are Latin, European, and so they want to keep things.
The word we see
often used is patrimony.
Yeah.
And I think this is kind of what you're saying to a degree.
Yes.
But they consider, as soon as the collection has been acquired by the library, the French people consider that the collection becomes patrimony.
a part of the patrimony.
And so they keep it for eternity.
And in the public library, they don't have the same idea of that, you know.
They put books for readers, and as soon as the readers don't need the collections,
they get rid of them, you know.
But we are what we call a national library, and it has formations to keep.
Well, the new library, it seems, was built to make a statement about precisely what you're saying.
Do you agree that a library is a symbol
particularly the brand-new, is a symbol of French culture, French literature, French history.
Is it a symbol, I guess, as much as a repository?
Yes, it is.
It is a symbol.
It is a symbol because till 1988, this library was more appreciated by
foreign people than by French people because it is considered by public as a place where you never can go into.
And so it's difficult because it's a closed space.
And so
Tolbiac, it is one of its advantage.
Tolbiac is a symbol outside of the art of Paris and outside of the history of the Bibliothèque Nationale.
And so everybody thinks that it can go into the Bibliothèque Nationale and something new, something better than it
existed before and as we had the campaign of press about the opening last December a lot of people knew the library and because of this press and particularly because of the polemics which
existed in 1989 when the project was proposed and chosen by the President of the Republic.
And all those things, people in France who did not know the library at once thought that they had a national library, and they knew now that
We have a national library, and so Tolbyac helped the library to be known for, by a lot of people.
So a source of pride even in your national, you think?
Pride.
as a source of national pride, do you think, for people to look and say, this is our history?
And I believe in Europe, and particularly in France, we don't have us in the United States this feeling of pride, because in the United States it's very striking for us.
Everybody can be proud of building of an institution of something here.
People, they are not proud.
It is not in their makeup.
No.
Sometimes you can meet somebody who can tell you, I'm proud of that.
But it's very rare.
It's not our mentality.
And it's a great difference between you and us, I'm sure.
It's rare.
Sometimes people told me that we are proud of this.
But some people, it's not all the people as you are.
I was very surprised to see on a bus, we are proud of America.
We don't say that.
We don't think that.
And you never will see that in France.
It's a question of mentality.
They can appreciate it, but, you know, French people could be proud.
You know, Paris is a wonderful city.
We have wonderful museums.
It's beautiful.
Yeah.
Louvre, museum, Picasso, Musée d'Orsay.
We had the Cité de la Villette.
We had a lot of recent museums.
not recent institutions all institutions entirely renovated and did you hear some friends tell you I'm proud of that it's normal they consider it as normal they don't because they are a very old nation and because they have the feeling
It's normal.
We pay taxes and everything is normal.
They can't realize when American people are visiting our buildings, they say, it's public money?
It is the state which entirely built your library?
Yes, of course, it's not possible.
And in France, they can't realize that all your museums have been built because
of private contributions.
There are some exceptions to that.
The Library of Congress, of course, is built by public funds, but that's one example, I think, where public money has gone into.
But all the other libraries, you're quite right, are not supported by tax money, so to speak.
My sense, though, with all these wonderful memorials, and we have the sense of French patrimony, and Monday is Bastille Day, and you're going to see so much pride and national honor.
No, no.
They are rather proud of their patrimony, but not in the meaning of the institution, but in patrimony.
Yes, the paintings of Manet, they are ours, the manuscripts, they are ours.
But it's not the pride for the institution, it's the pride for the collection, for the heritage, for the previous centuries, but not for
the institution.
Perhaps I'm mistaking that.
Well, but I think what you're saying is absolutely correct, but maybe the building is a symbol for this.
Yes, yes.
A symbol for this great private house.
But it cost, it cost so, so much money, and, you know, so... The English, like the English?
The British Library, for instance.
You did yours very quickly compared to the British.
Yes.
The English.
Yes, but it's, you know, it's what we call in France a grand travaux, and yes, it was built very, very quickly, and it's
People could be proud of that, not only as a library, but as a building.
As a public works project, even.
Yes.
But, you know, at this time in France there are a lot of people
unemployed people, and so on, and so the climate is not good climate, and so just people think this building costs a lot.
They are not absolutely sure that we need it, you know, because it's another difference with you.
It is our idea of libraries.
People here
think that they can be a student without going into a lab.
It's not necessary if they need three books, you can buy them.
And never the teachers, professors in universities say, you have to make this exercise, and bibliographical exercise,
You must go into the libraries.
It is more in your mentality than in ours, you know.
When I was in the United States, I was very surprised, because I visited university, and I looked at the facts of the libraries, and what I saw, it was, university, our library, one million documents.
It's the first thing you see.
In France, you can look at the paper about the university.
Of course, it's new to us, relatively speaking.
The first public library in America wasn't even established until 1852.
You have a much richer tradition here, maybe.
Yes, but Latin tradition.
The Latin buy their books.
They don't go to libraries.
Do you think that will change in the future?
It is going to, it is changing, but it's a long way to change.
It is changing.
I've never been in a library during my studies, till I chose to be a librarian.
You were not in the library?
When, you know, in your country, the children go into libraries very young.
No, I have not been in libraries.
Philippe Belaval, the Director General, told in a speech recently, I've never been in a library during my studies.
Who said this?
Director General here.
Of here?
I can't say that because I chose to be a librarian, so I started to go in libraries when I was 16 years old.
Do you have public libraries?
Yes, much more now than when I was young, but we have now.
It is changing, but you know,
The mentality can't change in ten years.
It takes... What was the context when the director general said, what was the context that he had never been in a library?
He certainly couldn't have been proud of that.
Was he proud of that, that he'd never been and he's the director general?
No, no, no.
It was in an internal meeting about the way we must
communicate about our library because people said in this meeting we have missed our communication and we did not, we have not succeeded to make this new library with its upper level different.
We did not succeed to make it publicized, I think.
Yes, available for people.
And he said, yes, it's difficult to give this information because people don't use libraries.
He said, I've never been in the library.
That's amazing.
In our country, we brought up to bring, my mother brought me, I brought my daughter.
But we don't do that anymore.
A big day when you're young, and we have two daughters, and my wife took the girls to the library, and they get their card, they get a library card, and they can go and take out books.
My children never go into libraries.
It must be very different.
So the people here were very,
they can understand, if they don't study at the library, why do they need the money going to a national library?
Yes.
So it must be mostly foreign people that come in and use the library?
Yes, but, um, or scholars.
Yes, scholars, French scholars, of course, but I don't speak about those ones, but those.
Excuse me, I forgot to tell something.
I'm sorry, Connie, were you asking a question?
No, just the cultural.
Okay.
The cultural matter, I guess, is something we really wanted to discuss, and I think you did address yourself to that.
Where were we?
It was very, very interesting what we were talking about.
Yeah, I guess, if then the vast, the general, the majority of French people aren't all that
enthusiastic about libraries, how is it, then, that your nation spent seven billion francs to build them?
I mean, where did they get that kind of support to do that?
Or was that mainly President Mitterrand?
I mean, I guess he was the one who really wanted this library.
How is it, then, that the nation allowed this to go forward?
We can say it's the same for the museums.
Before, the museums were not frequented by public.
Gradually public visited museums, and so as Mr. Mitterrand had decided a lot of major works, he just, he could wonder what he had to do, and he, you know, one of
his advisor told him why not a library and he said of course a library as he was fond of books he decided but i think it in his idea this time it was that the old library this one where you are it is a like a monument in where you can't enter and so
I suppose he thought we should do a library open to the public and where the public can go.
And he tried to do that.
But what I am telling you, it is not that we have built a library for a public which is not interested in.
but we have built a library in a context which is a difficult context because as the students don't use a lot of libraries the universities don't have a lot of libraries and so those
who frequent the libraries, who use the libraries, don't find any room for them in the libraries because we have a lack of seats for the students.
And so it is normal to have built a new library.
Bibliothèque du Saint-Pompidou welcomes every day 10,000 people of people, and it's a lot.
And so it means that we, there was a space for La Brèze.
What I tell you, it is, if you compare with your country, it is less in our tradition.
And it is less in our tradition to use the services of libraries, all because we don't use them when the children are young enough to start an education for that.
Or because when you are students, there are so many students that you can't choose them.
But Bobour was decided, was created in the 70s and opened in 1977.
And, you know, two years after, there were more than 10,000 a day.
Now, this is a public one.
Yes, quite free.
And this is part of the show?
Yes.
Public and free access.
Ah, 10,000 a day.
More than 10,000.
Now, I don't know if this is a paradox or not, but my wife and I have been remarking, and it is amazing to us that the French have such a great respect for their tradition of writers.
You see a statue to Molière, you see a street name for Balzac, you see a plaque for Stendhal.
I mean, you're... And bookstores.
And bookstores sell books.
So you really do have, it seems to me, a great respect for your... I mean, Anatole France, we see across, that your writers are respected.
That's true.
And so, therefore, the people must be reading the books.
They must be a very literate nation.
It's not...
because it's their patrimony and because Moliere and Lafontaine and all those authors are taught in the schools and so the children know them and they go to the theatre and they look
at the television, and so on.
But it's not perhaps a paradox, but if I take the example of Philippe Balaval, it doesn't mean he did not know all those authors, because he was a very brilliant student.
And so, of course, he knew Molière, La Fontaine, and so on.
And he read a lot, but... He didn't do it in the library or anything.
So you mentioned your own children don't go to libraries.
Where do they get books?
They don't read.
It depends.
But one of them, the youngest, who is still at school,
He's not a reader.
He goes into the library inside the school, small library.
He uses it when really he needs it.
And the second, he's a student in law and he uses the library only to lend, to borrow books.
And the eldest was a reader, but I'm not sure she frequented a lot to the library.
In their case, I can't say anything because as I spend my life in libraries, they don't want to do the same.
Perhaps they are not an example.
It doesn't necessarily go together.
You can be well-read, but not necessarily being at the library.
Of course, that's right.
At the library.
And for myself, I love to own the books that I read.
Particularly for the small things, novels and so on.
I couldn't imagine to read a book which is not mine.
You know, for a small... You know, I get a book from the library because I can't find it anyplace else.
And then once I get it, I have to have my own copy.
How often have we gone out to buy books that I've just read out of the library?
Because I really want to own this book and to have it.
And maybe that's... But boy, there are so many bookstores in Paris, librairies, everywhere.
Everywhere, people buying books.
Yes, I think we are...
Rather reading people?
Oh, and look at the river Seine.
They're still there.
The book stalls are... I think really that French are proud of their culture.
Oh, I think that goes without question.
More of their culture than of their institutions.
Perhaps I'm...
I make a mistake about that.
Because I repeat that, the National Library is an institution which was reserved to a part of the population.
So how can you be proud of an institution that you are not able to use?
And so, first when I started to work here 25 years ago, when I told my family, no, my close family, when I told people I'm working at the BN, people
I do not know what it means.
The first time I came here, five or six years ago, to see Madame de Lucie, Florence de Lucie, and I took the metro, and I was asking directions, police.
Nobody knew where the Bibliothèque Nationale was.
I showed the map, nobody knew where it was.
In Washington, if you have a small guide,
You look on a small guide, you have a picture of the main reading room of the Library of Congress.
Here, you can consult all the guides on Paris, never you will find the library.
It's not considered, till now, it was not considered as a monument.
Well, you can't even go in and see it.
No.
Yes.
We had to stand outside and look from the door.
So, I mean, that's important.
You don't let the public go in and see that reading room.
Is there a parallel with the Library of Congress, though?
Because most of the general population does not know what the Library of Congress does.
No, the Library of Congress is totally open, though.
I mean, you charge a reader's fee, right?
You will be charging at Tobiak a fee of 20 francs a day, right, for readers.
Mm-hmm.
It's not a... But the Library of Congress doesn't charge you for it.
But the average population does not benefit from the research.
Well, the Library of Congress says, please try and get the book someplace else.
If you can't find it someplace else, come here.
You know, the Library of Congress really doesn't want everybody to come unless they can't be accommodated someplace else.
You're talking about, you know, how La Fontaine...
the great writers are taught in the schools.
I don't know if you want to comment about this or if you're familiar, but in the United States we have a great debate going on now about the Western canon, the significance of the canonical writers, whether or not, you know, actually, the people actually question whether or not they should be reading Shakespeare or is he relevant anymore.
You don't have that problem here in France, do you?
I think
Is there a debate over what books are relevant and should be read and which ones should not?
Is that a problem, a concern that's going on in France, to your knowledge at all?
Excuse me, I've not followed.
Okay, the debate over which books are significant in the curriculum in the schools.
We have certain factions, feminists, African-Americans, so they're saying we should read the black writers.
Well, they're saying we should read women or Hispanic.
Because we have so many diverse heritages in the United States, there is a debate over which books should be taught in the schools.
That's not a problem here.
I didn't think so.
I thought because there is one definite cultural heritage here.
And then just one final question, because I know you're very busy.
That was the question I was going to add.
Give me a second.
With Europe, all the nations of Europe, moving towards a united Europe, economically, politically even, do you see, in the instance of France, the French library helping your country retain its cultural identity?
with all of these other factors working to make kind of a common country.
I mean, does a library help you retain your cultural identity while all of these other movements are going on, political, economic, a United Europe kind of a thing?
Or do you think perhaps the French will retain its French identity regardless of what happens politically and economically?
The library
We can say on a side that it will maintain the French identity.
As we keep the French legal deposit, it stays as a part
the art of the collection, because every year we receive 50,000 periodicals and about 50,000 monographs, about the same.
And it means that every year this collection
and it's treated and kept and with good things and bad things as the legal deposits.
And so it is the art of the collection.
And what I think it is National Library, which is organized around this legal deposit, continues to
maintain this identity.
Another thing I'm sure about that is that French people are not quite, you can see it, are not quite comfortable with other languages.
And so they are not like other people like East Europe or Dutch people or Scandinavian people.
And so those people, you know, they are English speaking fluently, and French people are not.
Even if the new generations do it better than the old ones.
But, you know, we can notice that in Tolbiac, we bought a lot of books in
English, German, Spanish, and... But people, writers, that it's too much, they would prefer to have more books in French.
In the San Pompidou, every year they buy less and less foreign languages books.
And so I think it's not so easy to...
that everybody can think because you know our children or we can go two weeks or three weeks in England or in Germany but to understand really serious matters and to have a
reflection, to have a long thought about the subject, a serious subject.
It's not so, is it?
And I think that the language will help French people to keep their identity.
Excellent answer.
Excellent.
I hadn't thought of that, but it's absolutely...
Nobody asked for me that before.
You know, I make my own answer.
No, but it makes perfect sense, of course.
Why didn't we think of that?
That absolutely makes sense.
But you're buying fewer and fewer books in foreign languages, and really the books, like the Library of Congress buys in 120 languages.
They have mandated that they're going to collect in everything.
Now, the French library is really focused on French
not only French history and culture, but the language in the French language.
So that's very, very interesting.
And so if we use English, you know, for studies, people can read in German, in Italian, in Spanish, in English, of course, but, you know, it will be only a part of the people, and you don't
change the mentality with a part of the people, you change with all of them.
So what you learn to us, it's not your language we learn it, but it's more, it's what you export, it's your television, your cinema,
your fast foods, your way of living, your shoes, your jogging, you know.
And the problem of identity is less the problem of identity of culture, that identity of way of living.
And gradually we have, all of us,
We have, all of us, a common way of living because we fly easily.
People have more money than it wants.
It's a paradox because the people travel, a part of the people
money enough to go, you know.
I like United States, and so we go to United States.
But I meet people who are traveling for United States.
I could not have imagined to meet the French people there.
And so for me, United States, it's a question of
culture than the way of living but people go there very easily as twenty years ago we used to going to Europe and so I'm not sure for Europe that people
new generations are going to feel as Europeans because of all that.
They will be French for their culture, and they will be cosmopolitan for their way of living.
But both between... Very correct.
Another quick question.
What prompted you to become a librarian?
Why did you decide to be a good librarian?
Because of... It's a progression.
Because I wanted to... First, I wanted to do something with history, because I was very... When I was a child, I was very keen of history and geography.
It was the only thing which interested me.
Geography and history.
You know, in France, both are taught together.
Yes.
Interesting.
And so I wanted to do something with both, and I thought that I should be a teacher of history.
One day my father told me, there is an institution called École Nationale Deschartes, it's like in France we call Grande École, it's prestigious, more prestigious than university.
And so I told him, I'll try to do that.
And so I did that and when I was at, I passed,
I integrated Ecole Nationale des Arts here in Paris.
I could choose between archives and libraries.
And as an historian, I should have chosen archives, but I chose libraries because
When parallel in my studies I made history of art, you know, I liked pictures and art, and so I preferred to be a librarian and I
wanted to work here in Bibliotheque Nationale in Department of Prints and Engravings and so I started I got the job and I started here 25 years ago in the Department of Prints and Engravings and I thought that my whole life professional life will be in this department and after I changed but
I want to be sure if this is your correct title here?
Yes.
Do you have a card, by the way?
Yes, I'm going to.
I think that's... What was the name of the school, again, that you went to?
Ecole Nationale des Chartres.
Deschartes?
Deschartes.
C-H-A-R-T-E-S.
Ah, I got it right.
Thank you.
It's one for Tolbiac and one for Richelieu.
Oh, very good.
Two cards.
Because two offices and I could have one with two addresses.
Thank you.
I think that we thank you very much for your time.
For a lot of time.